So now that we know which browsers support notifications, let's use them and let's first make sure that
enable notifications does something and asked for permission.
Now for that if we have a look at our index.html file in the public folder, you will notice that this
enable notifications button exists twice - once here in this site drawer and once in the toolbar, depending
on whether we're viewing our application on a mobile device or on the desktop. Both buttons have the
enable notifications CSS class,
so my goal is to select them by this class and then simply start working on them,
add an event listener and ask for permission whenever they get clicked. I'll do this in the app.js
file because this file gets imported in all my pages and use the same menu in the help
index.html file,
so by adding the code in app.js, I make sure that the button works there
too. So let's move over to app.js
and let's start working on it there.
First of all, I'll add a new variable at the top and I'll name it enable notification, notifications buttons.
Buttons because it's going to be an array and I'll use query selector all to select all elements
which have this enable notification text or a CSS class, enable notifications
it is with an s at the end.
So this is the CSS class I want to use to select my elements.
With that, I have access to all of them,
now I want to make sure that I only show these buttons if notifications are supported by a given browser
because if my browser doesn't support notifications, there is no need in showing that button.
So what I'll do is in my CSS file, I'll by default turn them off in app.css which is also important
in all pages, I'll turn it off by selecting enable notifications and setting display to none,
so by default they are not shown. Now in app.js,
I want to enable them,
I want to show them if the browser does support notifications. For this,
we can write an if statement to use if notification, that's the API name in window.
If our window, so the currently opened window has a notification object, that means that the given browser
supports notifications, so we can safely enable this button since we will be able to handle button clicks
and we'll add button click listeners soon.
So first of all, let me loop with a normal for loop through all these notification buttons,
it's only two here but if I were to add more, that's a flexible approach of manipulating them all
at once.
So here I will simply create my for loop where I use i in a very traditional way
and now I want to select my button
in each iteration to do it for all buttons and set the style display to inline block here
when we do support notifications. I also want to register a click listener,
so I'll add an event listener to the given button on a click and there, I want to execute a function which
I'll now create. I'll create a new function here and I'll name it
askForNotificationPermission. This new function is the function I want to execute on a click,
so I'll pass it here without parentheses, just a reference to this function and this function shall now
request permission.
We need to do this first,
theoretically if we want to display a notification, the browser will automatically prompt the user
but it's better if we do it manually which allows us to handle the user response
and of course control when we in the end ask for it.
In this case, we ask for it when the user actively click on this button, enable notifications,
so the chance of him agreeing to give us this permission is pretty high,
so that's a good place to manually trigger this trigger permission request.
We do ask for it by reaching out to notification and we know that this object does exist in the window
since this method can only get executed on a click on this button, which in turn is only displayed if
notification exists,
so this is safe. So on the notification object, we can execute request permission
and as the name implies, request permission will show a prompt to the user asking him whether he wants to give
us this permission to send or to display notifications or not.
Here's an important thing,
if you ask for notification permissions, you implicitly also get push permissions.
Now as I mentioned, these are two separate technologies,
notifications will be a simple box you display
whilst push is simply the technique of pushing messages from a server to the browser vendor
server to your web app
and again, you get permissions for both if the user accepts notifications because both is strongly connected
and serves the same purpose.
So request permission is the function here and we pass a callback function to it where we get the result
of the user choice.
So here first of all I can output it, user choice and output the result
and then I check if result is not equal to granted. Granted is one possible outcome
and obviously we will get granted if the user did accept to give us this permission.
So if it's not granted, then we know that we haven't gotten permission rights, no notification permission
granted.
That's too bad but nothing we can do here,
if you user block permissions,
we can't even ask again, if it's just undecided and close the tab or something like that,
he'll get asked next time again
but nothing more we can do, we try to pick the best possible point of time for asking. In the else case
here though, we now can display a notification because there, we now have the permission.
Now that's the next step I will do,
I will show you how you can actively display a new notification directly from within your normal Javascript
code.
Before we implement that though, let's see if this works.
So for that, you can either now bump up the version of your static cache in your service worker since
you changed your normal Javascript code or during development to make this easy,
you can go to your application, to the application tab,
clear storage and clear the site data to empty everything.
Once you then reload your app, not only does the new service worker get installed because you removed
the old one,
it also means that your new Javascript code is now active. If I open
the console now
and I open the side menu and click enable notifications, you'll see the prompt here at the top and there
we can block or allow.
Now if I click allow, you'll see user choice is granted,
so now we do have access to notifications so we could display one in the future. To score
some bonus points,
you could now of course turn the button style to display
none again.
So in here where we do have the rights, you could now execute some code to hide the button.
I'll leave it here though because I'll use it to show some notifications in the future
but you could hide it.
So with that, we got the code
we need to ask for permission, in the next lecture,
we will now actually display a new notification directly from our normal Javascript code.